netfilter-objs := core.o nf_log.o nf_queue.o nf_sockopt.o
nf_conntrack-objs	:= nf_conntrack_core.o nf_conntrack_standalone.o nf_conntrack_l3proto_generic.o nf_conntrack_proto_generic.o nf_conntrack_proto_tcp.o nf_conntrack_proto_udp.o

obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER) = netfilter.o

obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_NETLINK) += nfnetlink.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_NETLINK_QUEUE) += nfnetlink_queue.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_NETLINK_LOG) += nfnetlink_log.o

# connection tracking
obj-$(CONFIG_NF_CONNTRACK) += nf_conntrack.o

# SCTP protocol connection tracking
obj-$(CONFIG_NF_CT_PROTO_SCTP) += nf_conntrack_proto_sctp.o

# netlink interface for nf_conntrack
obj-$(CONFIG_NF_CT_NETLINK) += nf_conntrack_netlink.o

# connection tracking helpers
obj-$(CONFIG_NF_CONNTRACK_FTP) += nf_conntrack_ftp.o

# generic X tables 
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XTABLES) += x_tables.o xt_tcpudp.o

# targets
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_TARGET_CLASSIFY) += xt_CLASSIFY.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_TARGET_CONNMARK) += xt_CONNMARK.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_TARGET_MARK) += xt_MARK.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_TARGET_NFQUEUE) += xt_NFQUEUE.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_TARGET_NOTRACK) += xt_NOTRACK.o

# matches
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_COMMENT) += xt_comment.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_CONNBYTES) += xt_connbytes.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_CONNMARK) += xt_connmark.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_CONNTRACK) += xt_conntrack.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_DCCP) += xt_dccp.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_HELPER) += xt_helper.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_LENGTH) += xt_length.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_LIMIT) += xt_limit.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_MAC) += xt_mac.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_MARK) += xt_mark.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_PKTTYPE) += xt_pkttype.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_REALM) += xt_realm.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_SCTP) += xt_sctp.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_STATE) += xt_state.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_STRING) += xt_string.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_TCPMSS) += xt_tcpmss.o
obj-$(CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_PHYSDEV) += xt_physdev.o
